#summary Instructions for installing TMV using CMake

= Installing using CMake =

CMake is another automated build tool.  I am not very well versed in it, but a user of the 
TMV library, Andy Molloy, sent me the \texttt{CMakeLists.txt} files that he used to compile TMV,
so I am distributing them for anyone else who wants
to use them.  It is an easy way to build a basic TMV library, but I am not sure how hard it is
to get it working with BLAS or LAPACK libraries\footnote{
I was about to start learning more about it when a colleague, Erin Sheldon, introduced me to
SCons, which I like a lot, so I haven't been motivated to go back to CMake and really flesh
it out like I did with the SCons installation script.}.
The basic usage is as follows:

\begin{enumerate}
\item Download and unpack the tarball as described above (\S\ref{Install_Obtain}).

\item
Download CMake from \url{http://www.cmake.org/} if you do not already have it.

\item
In the TMV directory, type\\
\texttt{cmake -i .} $\qquad$ (for interactive text-based configuration) \\
or\\
\texttt{ccmake .} $\qquad \quad \,$ (for menu-based configuration) \\
for Unix, or run \texttt{CMakeSetup.exe} in Windows.

Answer the configuration questions and/or set the options listed.

\item
Type:\\
\texttt{make tmv}\\
\texttt{make tmv\_symband}\\
to make the libraries.

\item
(Optional) Type:\\
\texttt{make tmvtest1}\\
\texttt{make tmvtest2}\\
\texttt{make tmvtest3}\\
to make the test suites.

\end{enumerate}

I haven't incorporated most of the options that I added to the SCons installation above.
But I think all of that is possible with CMake, so if someone who is an expert in CMake wants
to do this and send me the CMake files for it, I'll include them in future releases.
